README.md, before:

The library is the new implementation of the ideas related to PhLADiPreLiO (Phonetic Languages
Approach to Discovering the Preferred Line Options) for different languages. It uses hashes and
has at the moment (as of the version 0.14.2.0) not the full functionality. The previous implementation 
and its documentation are at the links:

[Old approach](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/phonetic-languages-simplified-generalized-examples-array)

[Підхід фонетичних (просодичних) мов до відкриття більш бажаних варіантів текстового рядка (PhLADiPreLiO) з використанням Haskell](https://oleksandrzhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Ukr.21.pdf)

[Phonetic languages approach to discovering preferred line options (PhLADiPreLiO) using Haskell](https://oleksandrzhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Eng.21.pdf)

The new documentation for the usage of the software package for Ukrainian language (with noteworthy
information related to other languages as well) is by the following links:

[Why some lines are easy to pronounce and others are not, or prosodic unpredictability as a characteristic of text](https://www.academia.edu/105067761/Why_some_lines_are_easy_to_pronounce_and_others_are_not_or_prosodic_unpredictability_as_a_characteristic_of_text)

[Чому деякі рядки легко вимовляти, а інші — ні, або просодична неспрогнозованість як характеристика тексту](https://www.academia.edu/105067723/%D0%A7%D0%BE%D0%BC%D1%83_%D0%B4%D0%B5%D1%8F%D0%BA%D1%96_%D1%80%D1%8F%D0%B4%D0%BA%D0%B8_%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%B3%D0%BA%D0%BE_%D0%B2%D0%B8%D0%BC%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%BB%D1%8F%D1%82%D0%B8_%D0%B0_%D1%96%D0%BD%D1%88%D1%96_%D0%BD%D1%96_%D0%B0%D0%B1%D0%BE_%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%BE%D0%B4%D0%B8%D1%87%D0%BD%D0%B0_%D0%BD%D0%B5%D1%81%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B7%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D1%96%D1%81%D1%82%D1%8C_%D1%8F%D0%BA_%D1%85%D0%B0%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%BA%D1%82%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%B0_%D1%82%D0%B5%D0%BA%D1%81%D1%82%D1%83)

The old documentation for the implementation is available at the following links.
[Більш бажані варіанти текстового рядка на основі PhLADiPreLiO з використанням Haskell — базові ідеї](https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/phladiprelioUkr.7.pdf)

[Preferred line options based on the PhLADiPreLiO using Haskell](https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/phladiprelioEng.7.pdf)

The examples of the using the new functionality in the 0.8.0.0 version is in two short videos by
the links below (they are for the phladiprelio-ukrainian-simple, the parallel project for Ukranian):

[+f <filename> <code> mode additions](https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/593118766229253/)

[+m <another filename> <another code> mode — new one in this version](https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/325188039864718/)

Since the version 0.6.0.0 the default mode for non-tests output is in two-column. This improves 
the UI / UX for the end user. Besides there is the possibility to write the result to a file.

The video with the demonstration of the new functionality in the version 0.6.0.0 is by the link for
the parallel project phladiprelio-ukrainian-simple:

[demo for version 0.6.0.0](https://www.facebook.com/100012184148486/posts/1767318773684244)

Examples of the new functionality in the version 0.5.1.1 of the related prototype project for 
Ukrainian is in the videos:

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid033gzq8MCRQsm65mPrzJL25MZNgvW7mezQSywULiVMnqmTBMtSW2jW4ABh6HVMWZNLl

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid05mMCUu5HVoA6aV4kLJ69tQZHyhTRZgXLRvtdLitWCm6JeB2T2ktfkd2opfjjgTxFl

Video recordings as examples of the working prototype usage and how you can listen to 
Ukrainian text using Google services are at the links below:

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/796964592047546

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid02EaC4Zwn4YVjfVFWpUhLoHYomiFHZQaiMdorLa6PPx9kXBXepTYPFEFMv8iyV4wAYl

See the demonstration video for the new functionality in version 0.11.0.0 by the link on the example
of the parallel project usage:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zapAPpQ-fc4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zapAPpQ-fc4)

Since the version 0.12.0.0 there is a possibility to compare the distances (opposite to the
similarity measure) for the line options using the +l2 ... -l2 command line group of options. It is
generally a completely new functionality for the package.

Since the version 0.13.0.0 there is a possibility to change the durations of the selected syllables
using the ={set of digits} precisely after the needed syllable. For more information, see the output
of the call of the program with the -h command line argument. This significantly extends the general
possibilities of the program, especially for the music composing.

Since the version 0.13.0.0 there is a possibility to change the durations of the selected syllables
using the ={set of digits} precisely after the needed syllable. For more information, see the output
of the call of the program with the -h command line argument. This significantly extends the general
possibilities of the program, especially for the music composing.

Since the version 0.14.0.0 there were fixed issues with distance between line options in several branches and added a possibility to analyse and compare two lines from the same file using either additionally to +m also +m2 group of command line arguments, or +m3 group of arguments instead.

For the list of bash aliases a few of which are used in the videos, see:
https://github.com/Oleksandr-Zhabenko/phladiprelio-alias/blob/main/.bashrc

The version 0.14.2.0 fixes issue with one syllable before '=' sign in the music mode and applies some performance improvements.

 Devotion
 ========

The author would like to devote this project to support the [Foundation
Gastrostars](https://gastrostars.nl). The release version 0.7.0.0 is dedicated to Vico Kok.

At the day of publication of the first version of the package (12/03/2023) there is
the foundation founder's (this is [Emma Kok](https://www.emmakok.nl)) Birthday.

And on the 17/03/2023 there is the author's Birthday. 

And at the 19/03/2023 is St. Joseph the Betrothed Day.

On the 19/04/2023 there is Emma's namesday, the memory of St. Emma of Lesum or Emma of Stiepel 
(also known as Hemma and Imma) Day.

On the 14/05/2023 there is Mother's Day. It is also a good opportunity to support the foundation.

On the 25/05/2023 there is Ascension Day according to Julian Greek Orthodox calendar. 

On the 01/06/2023 there is Children's Day in many countries including Ukraine and the Netherlands.

On the 09/06/2023 there was unofficial World Friendship Day. 

On the 15/06/2023 there is the final bachelor's exam for Enzo Kok in violin playing in Amsterdam. 

On the 30/07/2023 there is the Birthday of Vico Kok and International Friendship Day. Therefore, the
release version 0.7.0.0 is devoted to Vico Kok.

The version 0.8.0.0 is devoted to [Enzo Kok](https://enzokok.nl) who has Birthday on the 14/08/2023.

The versions 0.9.0.0 and 0.9.0.1 are devoted to Nathalie Kok, the mother of the founder of the Foundation and the
member of the foundation board, who has Birthday on the 22/09/2023.

Three videos with examples of the usage of the new music mode for the parallel project for Ukrainian
language are by the following link:
https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid02Vtcxuo5d73ZqsmgbxoRxLJoxLLmfpZ5B4VB9g7AQzuVTnydLHVtGRD48Q8RWLy2dl

On the 01/10/2023 there are World Music Day and André's Rieu Birthday. So the version 0.10.0.0 is
additionally devoted to him as well as to the Kok family — Emma and Enzo are amazing and fantastic musicians, Vico
works with PhilZuid, Sophie sings in the classical manner. Nathalie Kok with love to her family and 
appreciation for André's Rieu support also celebrates the Day. In Ukraine this day has several important 
celebrations — Intercession of the Holy Theotokos (Pokrova), Cossacks' Day, Day of Defenders of Ukraine (especially relevant during the Russian war against Ukraine).

On the 01/11/2023 there is All Saints Solemnity for Roman Catholics. 

On the 11/11/2023 there is St. Martin of Tours Day for Roman Catholics and Poland Independence Day.

The version 0.14.0.0 is also devoted to the bright memory of the Artem Sachuk, who perished as a soldier defending Ukraine from the Russian occupants. Kingdom of God to his soul and eternal memory! Condolences to everybody who knows him.

The version 0.14.2.0 is also devoted to Sophie Kok, a sister of Emma Kok, who turned 18 on the 06/01/2024. Besides, on the 22/01/2024 there is Day of Unity of Ukraine and on the 23/01/2024 there is for Orthodox Church memory of St. Paulinus of Nola. On the 30/01/2024 there is for the Greek-Orthodox and Greek-Catholics memory of Saints Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom in their Council.

The version 0.15.0.0 added new comparative line-by-line mode from various files. Uses '-cm' command line parameter. Analogue of the functionality by the link:
https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Eng.21.html#comparative-mode-of-operation-c

On the 08/03/2024 there is International Women's Day.

All support is welcome, including donations for the needs of the Ukrainian army, IDPs and refugees.

If you would like to share some financial support, please, contact the mentioned foundation
using the URL:

[Contact Foundation GASTROSTARS](https://gastrostars.nl/hou-mij-op-de-hoogte)

or 

[Donation Page](https://gastrostars.nl/doneren)

Commit message:

Added new release data for 0.20.0.0 release

README.md, after:

The library is the new implementation of the ideas related to PhLADiPreLiO (Phonetic Languages
Approach to Discovering the Preferred Line Options) for different languages. It uses hashes and
has at the moment (as of the version 0.20.0.0) not the full functionality. The previous implementation 
and its documentation are at the links:

[Old approach](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/phonetic-languages-simplified-generalized-examples-array)

[Підхід фонетичних (просодичних) мов до відкриття більш бажаних варіантів текстового рядка (PhLADiPreLiO) з використанням Haskell](https://oleksandrzhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Ukr.21.pdf)

[Phonetic languages approach to discovering preferred line options (PhLADiPreLiO) using Haskell](https://oleksandrzhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Eng.21.pdf)

The new documentation for the usage of the software package for Ukrainian language (with noteworthy
information related to other languages as well) is by the following links:

[Why some lines are easy to pronounce and others are not, or prosodic unpredictability as a characteristic of text](https://www.academia.edu/105067761/Why_some_lines_are_easy_to_pronounce_and_others_are_not_or_prosodic_unpredictability_as_a_characteristic_of_text)

[Чому деякі рядки легко вимовляти, а інші — ні, або просодична неспрогнозованість як характеристика тексту](https://www.academia.edu/105067723/%D0%A7%D0%BE%D0%BC%D1%83_%D0%B4%D0%B5%D1%8F%D0%BA%D1%96_%D1%80%D1%8F%D0%B4%D0%BA%D0%B8_%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%B3%D0%BA%D0%BE_%D0%B2%D0%B8%D0%BC%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%BB%D1%8F%D1%82%D0%B8_%D0%B0_%D1%96%D0%BD%D1%88%D1%96_%D0%BD%D1%96_%D0%B0%D0%B1%D0%BE_%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D1%81%D0%BE%D0%B4%D0%B8%D1%87%D0%BD%D0%B0_%D0%BD%D0%B5%D1%81%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B3%D0%BD%D0%BE%D0%B7%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B0%D0%BD%D1%96%D1%81%D1%82%D1%8C_%D1%8F%D0%BA_%D1%85%D0%B0%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%BA%D1%82%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B8%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B8%D0%BA%D0%B0_%D1%82%D0%B5%D0%BA%D1%81%D1%82%D1%83)

The old documentation for the implementation is available at the following links.
[Більш бажані варіанти текстового рядка на основі PhLADiPreLiO з використанням Haskell — базові ідеї](https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/phladiprelioUkr.7.pdf)

[Preferred line options based on the PhLADiPreLiO using Haskell](https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/phladiprelioEng.7.pdf)

The examples of the using the new functionality in the 0.8.0.0 version is in two short videos by
the links below (they are for the phladiprelio-ukrainian-simple, the parallel project for Ukranian):

[+f <filename> <code> mode additions](https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/593118766229253/)

[+m <another filename> <another code> mode — new one in this version](https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/325188039864718/)

Since the version 0.6.0.0 the default mode for non-tests output is in two-column. This improves 
the UI / UX for the end user. Besides there is the possibility to write the result to a file.

The video with the demonstration of the new functionality in the version 0.6.0.0 is by the link for
the parallel project phladiprelio-ukrainian-simple:

[demo for version 0.6.0.0](https://www.facebook.com/100012184148486/posts/1767318773684244)

Examples of the new functionality in the version 0.5.1.1 of the related prototype project for 
Ukrainian is in the videos:

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid033gzq8MCRQsm65mPrzJL25MZNgvW7mezQSywULiVMnqmTBMtSW2jW4ABh6HVMWZNLl

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid05mMCUu5HVoA6aV4kLJ69tQZHyhTRZgXLRvtdLitWCm6JeB2T2ktfkd2opfjjgTxFl

Video recordings as examples of the working prototype usage and how you can listen to 
Ukrainian text using Google services are at the links below:

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/videos/796964592047546

https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid02EaC4Zwn4YVjfVFWpUhLoHYomiFHZQaiMdorLa6PPx9kXBXepTYPFEFMv8iyV4wAYl

See the demonstration video for the new functionality in version 0.11.0.0 by the link on the example
of the parallel project usage:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zapAPpQ-fc4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zapAPpQ-fc4)

Since the version 0.12.0.0 there is a possibility to compare the distances (opposite to the
similarity measure) for the line options using the +l2 ... -l2 command line group of options. It is
generally a completely new functionality for the package.

Since the version 0.13.0.0 there is a possibility to change the durations of the selected syllables
using the ={set of digits} precisely after the needed syllable. For more information, see the output
of the call of the program with the -h command line argument. This significantly extends the general
possibilities of the program, especially for the music composing.

Since the version 0.13.0.0 there is a possibility to change the durations of the selected syllables
using the ={set of digits} precisely after the needed syllable. For more information, see the output
of the call of the program phladiprelioUkr from the parallel project phladiprelio-ukrainian-simple 
with the -h command line argument. This significantly extends the general
possibilities of the program, especially for the music composing.

Since the version 0.14.0.0 there were fixed issues with distance between line options in several branches and added a possibility to analyse and compare two lines from the same file using either additionally to +m also +m2 group of command line arguments, or +m3 group of arguments instead.

For the list of bash aliases a few of which are used in the videos, see:
https://github.com/Oleksandr-Zhabenko/phladiprelio-alias/blob/main/.bashrc

The version 0.14.2.0 fixes issue with one syllable before '=' sign in the music mode and applies some performance improvements.

 Breaking changes in version 0.20.0.0
 ====================================

Since the version 0.20.0.0 the way of calculation is significantly changed, therefore the results are expected to be different. Please, have this in mind. It is expected to have larger groups and more options to choose from. Nevertheless, the approach becomes more stable. The performance and resources consumtion are very closely comparable with probably some subtle differences between versions 0.15.* and 0.20.0.0.

 Devotion
 ========

The author would like to devote this project to support the [Foundation
Gastrostars](https://gastrostars.nl). The release version 0.7.0.0 is dedicated to Vico Kok.

At the day of publication of the first version of the package (12/03/2023) there is
the foundation founder's (this is [Emma Kok](https://www.emmakok.nl)) Birthday.

And on the 17/03/2023 there is the author's Birthday. 

And at the 19/03/2023 is St. Joseph the Betrothed Day.

On the 19/04/2023 there is Emma's namesday, the memory of St. Emma of Lesum or Emma of Stiepel 
(also known as Hemma and Imma) Day.

On the 14/05/2023 there is Mother's Day. It is also a good opportunity to support the foundation.

On the 25/05/2023 there is Ascension Day according to Julian Greek Orthodox calendar. 

On the 01/06/2023 there is Children's Day in many countries including Ukraine and the Netherlands.

On the 09/06/2023 there was unofficial World Friendship Day. 

On the 15/06/2023 there is the final bachelor's exam for Enzo Kok in violin playing in Amsterdam. 

On the 30/07/2023 there is the Birthday of Vico Kok and International Friendship Day. Therefore, the
release version 0.7.0.0 is devoted to Vico Kok.

The version 0.8.0.0 is devoted to [Enzo Kok](https://enzokok.nl) who has Birthday on the 14/08/2023.

The versions 0.9.0.0 and 0.9.0.1 are devoted to Nathalie Kok, the mother of the founder of the Foundation and the
member of the foundation board, who has Birthday on the 22/09/2023.

Three videos with examples of the usage of the new music mode for the parallel project for Ukrainian
language are by the following link:
https://www.facebook.com/Oleksandr.S.Zhabenko/posts/pfbid02Vtcxuo5d73ZqsmgbxoRxLJoxLLmfpZ5B4VB9g7AQzuVTnydLHVtGRD48Q8RWLy2dl

On the 01/10/2023 there are World Music Day and André's Rieu Birthday. So the version 0.10.0.0 is
additionally devoted to him as well as to the Kok family — Emma and Enzo are amazing and fantastic musicians, Vico
works with PhilZuid, Sophie sings in the classical manner. Nathalie Kok with love to her family and 
appreciation for André's Rieu support also celebrates the Day. In Ukraine this day has several important 
celebrations — Intercession of the Holy Theotokos (Pokrova), Cossacks' Day, Day of Defenders of Ukraine (especially relevant during the Russian war against Ukraine).

On the 01/11/2023 there is All Saints Solemnity for Roman Catholics. 

On the 11/11/2023 there is St. Martin of Tours Day for Roman Catholics and Poland Independence Day.

The version 0.14.0.0 is also devoted to the bright memory of the Artem Sachuk, who perished as a soldier defending Ukraine from the Russian occupants. Kingdom of God to his soul and eternal memory! Condolences to everybody who knows him.

The version 0.14.2.0 is also devoted to Sophie Kok, a sister of Emma Kok, who turned 18 on the 06/01/2024. Besides, on the 22/01/2024 there is Day of Unity of Ukraine and on the 23/01/2024 there is for Orthodox Church memory of St. Paulinus of Nola. On the 30/01/2024 there is for the Greek-Orthodox and Greek-Catholics memory of Saints Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom in their Council.

The version 0.15.0.0 added new comparative line-by-line mode from various files. Uses '-cm' command line parameter. Analogue of the functionality by the link:
https://oleksandr-zhabenko.github.io/uk/rhythmicity/PhLADiPreLiO.Eng.21.html#comparative-mode-of-operation-c

On the 08/03/2024 there is International Women's Day.

On the 12/03/2024 there was a Birthday of Emma Kok, the founder of the Foundation Gastrostars. She turned 16. Therefore, the release 0.20.0.0 is devoted i.e. tributede to her.

Besides, you can support Ukrainian people in various forms.

All support is welcome, including donations for the needs of the Ukrainian army, IDPs and refugees.

If you would like to share some financial support, please, contact the mentioned foundation
using the URL:

[Contact Foundation GASTROSTARS](https://gastrostars.nl/hou-mij-op-de-hoogte)

or 

[Donation Page](https://gastrostars.nl/doneren)
